
CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION


This book is a prolonged effort to establish a distinction between
what is called mind and what is called matter. Nothing is more simple
than to realise this distinction when you do not go deeply into it;
nothing is more difficult when you analyse it a little. At first
sight, it seems impossible to confuse things so far apart as a thought
and a block of stone; but on reflection this great contrast vanishes,
and other differences have to be sought which are less apparent and of
which one has not hitherto dreamed.

First let us say how the question presents itself to us. The fact
which we must take as a starting point, for it is independent of
every kind of theory, is that there exists something which is
"knowable." Not only science, but ordinary life and our everyday
conversation, imply that there are things that we know. It is with
regard to these things that we have to ask ourselves if some belong to
what we call the mind and others to what we call matter.

Let us suppose, by way of hypothesis, the knowable to be entirely and
absolutely homogeneous. In that case we should be obliged to set aside
the question as one already decided. Where everything is homogeneous,
there is no distinction to be drawn. But this hypothesis is, as we all
know, falsified by observation. The whole body of the knowable is
formed from an agglomeration of extremely varied elements, amongst
which it is easy to distinguish a large number of divisions. Things
may be classified according to their colour, their shape, their
weight, the pleasure they give us, their quality of being alive or
dead, and so on; one much given to classification would only be
troubled by the number of possible distinctions.

Since so many divisions are possible, at which shall we stop and say:
this is the one which corresponds exactly to the opposition of mind
and matter? The choice is not easy to make; for we shall see that
certain authors put the distinction between the physical and the
mental in one thing, others in another. Thus there have been a very
large number of distinctions proposed, and their number is much
greater than is generally thought. Since we propose to make ourselves
judges of these distinctions, since, in fact, we shall reject most of
them in order to suggest entirely new ones, it must be supposed that
we shall do so by means of a criterion. Otherwise, we should only be
acting fantastically. We should be saying peremptorily, "In my opinion
this is mental," and there would be no more ground for discussion
than, if the assertion were "I prefer the Romanticists to the
Classicists," or "I consider prose superior to poetry."

The criterion which I have employed, and which I did not analyse until
the unconscious use I had made of it revealed its existence to me, is
based on the two following rules:--

1. _A Rule of Method._--The distinction between mind and matter must
not only apply to the whole of the knowable, but must be the deepest
which can divide the knowable, and must further be one of a permanent
character. _A priori_, there is nothing to prove the existence of such
a distinction; it must be sought for and, when found, closely
examined.

2. _An Indication of the Direction in which the Search must be
Made._--Taking into account the position already taken up by the
majority of philosophers, the manifestation of mind, if it exists,
must be looked for in the domain of facts dealt with by psychology,
and the manifestation of matter in the domain explored by physicists.

I do not conceal from myself that there may be much that is arbitrary
in my own criterion; but this does not seem to me possible to avoid.
We must therefore appeal to psychology, and ask whether it is
cognisant of any phenomenon offering a violent, lasting, and
ineffaceable contrast with all the rest of the knowable.

_The Method of Concepts and the Method of Enumeration._--Many authors
are already engaged in this research, and employ a method which I
consider very bad and very dangerous--the method of concepts. This
consists in looking at real and concrete phenomena in their most
abstract form. For example, in studying the mind, they use this word
"mind" as a general idea which is supposed to contain all the
characteristics of psychical phenomena; but they do not wait to
enumerate these characteristics or to realise them, and they remain
satisfied with the extremely vague idea springing from an unanalysed
concept. Consequently they use the word "mind" with the imprudence of
a banker who should discount a trade bill without ascertaining
whether the payment of that particular piece of paper had been
provided for. This amounts to saying that the discussion of
philosophical problems takes especially a verbal aspect; and the more
complex the phenomena a concept thus handled, contains, the more
dangerous it is. A concept of the colour red has but a very simple
content, and by using it, this content can be very clearly
represented. But how can the immense meaning of the word "mind" be
realised every time that it is used? For example, to define mind and
to separate it from the rest of the knowable which is called matter,
the general mode of reasoning is as follows: all the knowable which is
apparent to our senses is essentially reduced to motion; "mind," that
something which lives, feels, and judges, is reduced to "thought." To
understand the difference between matter and mind, it is necessary to
ask one's self whether there exists any analogy in nature between
motion and thought. Now this analogy does not exist, and what we
comprehend, on the contrary, is their absolute opposition. Thought is
not a movement, and has nothing in common with a movement. A movement
is never anything else but a displacement, a transfer, a change of
place undergone by a particle of matter. What relation of similarity
exists between this geometrical fact and a desire, an emotion, a
sensation of bitterness? Far from being identical, these two facts
are as distinct as any facts can be, and their distinction is so deep
that it should be raised to the height of a principle, the principle
of heterogeneity.

This is almost exactly the reasoning that numbers of philosophers have
repeated for several years without giving proof of much originality.
This is what I term the metaphysics of concept, for it is a
speculation which consists in juggling with abstract ideas. The moment
that a philosopher opposes thought to movement, I ask myself under
what form he can think of a "thought," I suppose he must very
poetically and very vaguely represent to himself something light and
subtle which contrasts with the weight and grossness of material
bodies. And thus our philosopher is punished in the sinning part; his
contempt of the earthly has led him into an abuse of abstract
reasoning, and this abuse has made him the dupe of a very naïve
physical metaphor.

At bottom I have not much faith in the nobility of many of our
abstract ideas. In a former psychological study[2] I have shown that
many of our abstractions are nothing else than embryonic, and, above
all, loosely defined concrete ideas, which can satisfy only an
indolent mind, and are, consequently, full of snares.

The opposition between mind and matter appears to me to assume a very
different meaning if, instead of repeating ready-made formulas and
wasting time on the game of setting concept against concept, we take
the trouble to return to the study of nature, and begin by drawing up
an inventory of the respective phenomena of mind and matter, examining
with each of these phenomena the characteristics in which the
first-named differ from the second. It is this last method, more slow
but more sure than the other, that we shall follow; and we will
commence by the study of matter.